(light jazzy music)
For decades there have been people who have
attempted to bring science and spiritual
consciousness together if not science and religion.
Bernard Haisch author of The God Theory
and now The Purpose-Driven Universe,
is an astrophysicist who has spent decades
looking at the underlying principles of creation.
To the chagrin of some of his colleagues,
he says the most fundamental questions
cannot be answered without acknowledging
the presence of an intelligence
or divine order within the universe.
Bernard, you're in a field that has a lot of resistance
to opening up to new concepts, especially in
the subject of in the realm of consciousness.
This is so hotly contested across many
areas of science, particularly in your area.
So I wanted to find out on a very personal level for you,
what was your original impetus or inspiration to try
to reconcile spirituality
with science in this arena as an astrophysicist?
I guess in the desire to see if there's some kind of
reconciliation between science and spirituality
goes all the back to my childhood
cus when I was a young boy I knew that
there were two things I wanted to be in life.
A priest and an astronomer (laughs).
So I was a very scrupulous little, catholic alter boy.
Went to a seminary, pretty much believed in God,
and at the same time wanted to become a scientist too.
That's possible to do there are in fact
Jesuit astronomers who do very modern research.
But anyway I had both these things in mind
from the time I was just starting grade school really.
So it never seemed incompatible to me to think that
there's a way to combine these things.
Although even later on when I left the seminary,
and got engaged in scientific research, I realized that,
well most of that world, most of that community,
was not really interested at all in spiritual questions.
So it has been kind of a bit of a struggle
to keep an equilibrium when the community
you're working with is opposed to some of
the fundamental ideas that I think are important.
We were talking off camera just a moment ago,
about the fact that if we can't begin to acknowledge
that some kind of pervasive consciousness exists
which seems like just a really base level
area to enter,
then how viable are a lot of these
sciences that exist today because if you start looking
at the work of many people we've interviewed,
Dean Radin and some of his experiments and such,
you can't seem to separate consciousness
from any of the fields of science from life.
Well remember though that science has got
a track record of success, I mean the fact that we're
sitting here talking and being filmed right now
is certainly an indication that science works.
The car you drive, the computer that we all use.
So science has got a lot to be proud of
and it can keep scientists busy for decades
working on these thing and discoveries in astrophysics,
for example the discover of dark energy.
It's a major discovery and so there's lots and lots
of stuff within the purely physical realm
that can keep scientists very busy and occupied
and result in things that benefit society
and demonstrate for sure that science works
to keep them sort of engaged and away from
the other topics that in the long run may prove
to be more significant, but right now
things like consciousness--
Interesting.
Well you know they're being pursued in the same way
that other things are in terms of reductionism,
trying to look at brain explanations for consciousness.
That'll keep people busy for years yet.
But ultimately I think I think we will come to realize
that there is more to be explored outside
the boundaries of current science then we realize.
Yeah I think that's kind of the point I was
getting at I mean even in the world of computer
sciences they're already beginning to understand
it's going to interface with consciousness
with the mind sooner or later,
I mean we're already starting to get there right?
That's Michio Kaku's work, that's what they're saying,
that the computing structures of the future will be directly
interfacing with thought and reacting to thought
and carrying out functions according to thought.
Even in those very hard sciences you still
can't get away from the ultimate outcomes.
I respect the fact that, as you already see this
long term view, you have taken it upon yourself
to use your craft, your scientific knowledge
and your understanding that consciousness exists,
to begin looking at the universe from a very
structural point of view as to how this can exist.
So I'd say from here, well okay astrophysics,
how 'bout Edgar Mitchell, I know that you know Edgar.
Yes.
And there seems to be
this experience once one truly taps in
to the nature of the cosmos that almost bring up
a spiritual kind of feeling or inquiry
or understanding such as Edgar's.
Is that part of what you experience in your work?
Well I can't say I experience anything
as profound Edgar's, on the way back from the Moon
he had this cosmic-consciousness experience
in the little capsule they were returning to Earth in.
It was very profound, it certainly affected his life.
I can't say anything that profound ever happened to me.
So my interest in these things is more from
the intellectual side, the evidence from within science
that the universe is apparently finely tuned.
That makes a big influence, has a big influence on me.
So it's coming, in my case more from
the things that I've learned intellectually,
than from any kind of mystical or cosmic experience.
Even though those impulses
are just a natural part of your being.
I guess they are I mean the interest in spirituality
is something that I grew up with, I never left entirely.
I sort of drifted away from that when I left the seminary.
Then came back to it again with a more or less
independent perspective and that's what caused me
to write these two books of mine.
The Purpose-Guided Universe and The God Theory.
To present to people the notion that,
yeah you can be perfectly happy with science
as a way to study the world but not let that be
the totality of your world view, that there are reasons
to expand your world view beyond that
and still stay true to science for example you don't
have to give up belief in the Big Bang.
The Big Bang is a great way to start a universe.
I think from a meta-physical perspective
it's a wonderful way to start a universe.
And evolution I think is a key aspect
of the whole purpose behind the universe.
And so I think you need to keep these things
as fundamental bases of science and at the same time
of your own world view and that doesn't preclude
believing in spiritual realities.
Thank you for that, as a scientist
I appreciate sitting across from you.
Let's talk about where we start getting into
the more controversial aspect of your work.
At some point I do want to talk about
your understanding of the finely-tuned aspect
of the universe because this all goes together now.
You're saying, yes 14 billion years ago or so
there was a Big Bang and however there is something
that guided even that and then what happened ultimately,
to intelligently put the fine tuning in place
for the structure of the universe so,
let's just launch right into your story.
Well the idea is that the universe is,
well it's not an idea the universe is finely structured
it's a fact, we know that there are at least
10 or a dozen or so different constants,
the laws of nature, that probably could have
been very different for all we know.
If they'd been very different we wouldn't be here to,
we wouldn't be her at all, the universe would
not be full of life, at least our planet Earth would
not be full of life and probably the universes too.
But anyway, the laws of nature had to be rather
finely tuned to work together to allow life
to rise at least here and then probably elsewhere.
So that's a very important thing to keep in mind.
That's something that needs an explanation.
And if you want to you can explain all this away
without any spiritual interpretation at all if you want to.
That's what scientists have generally done,
they say well okay we have a finely tuned universe,
this implies there have to be other universes,
maybe even an infinite number of other universes
that are different from ours and so of course
we're in this one because it's the only one we can fit in,
we can originate in, but there have to be lots
of other because we don't want ours to be special.
I mean that would imply a creator
and of course we can't tolerate that.
Right and so first of all,
what is your definition of God?
You wrote The God Theory, what is your definition of God?
Well that's a (laugh) good question.
I don't know what God is anymore than anybody else does.
I'm guessing I think that God is probably
some infinite, transcendent consciousness,
some consciousness that is simultaneously
greater than infinite and less than zero.
Some consciousness that desired to know itself
and to know itself it needed to create a space,
a reality in which it could act out and experience things,
which I think is what we're doing right here, right now
talking and what we do as human beings.
I think we are manifestations of God,
seeking physical experience because that's
perhaps a joy to God to experience,
not always a joy to us down here
but also because that may be a way for God to evolve.
Maybe God himself, I say himself.
I mean himself, herself, itself.
I think God perhaps needs to evolve
and can do that only through entering
the space, the space-time stream
and existing in a physical universe as intelligent beings.
Or even not so intelligent beings such as animals.
I think that's all part of how God may increase
his greatness, increase his perfection
if such thing is possible.
So if I'm to read into that, we're fractals
of God, the fractals of that consciousness
that you are referring to as God.
This intelligent source that essentially permeates
everything and is trying to, seeking to express itself
and we're expressions of that?
I think that we're saying the same thing.
You use the term fractal which is a very definite,
has a very specific--
Yeah well I'm with the scientists,
maybe I'm using it a little too meta-physically.
Yeah.
So use it in the proper term,
that you would describe.
Fractal would be, it's a mathematical term
having to do with dimensionalities and so on.
I think what you're talking about is simply that we are,
say sparks of God, if you imagine God as being
some huge bonfire of consciousness,
we're little sparks of God that adventured into
a space-time stream, a physical universe,
probably in order to give experience
back to God so that God can know himself.
If you're the only being around
and you have infinite potential
that's different than knowing,
that's different than having the experience.
I think even an infinite intelligence
needs to come to know itself and to have experience
in order to fully comprehend himself.
There's a mystery here of course
in which I don't claim to have solved,
but I think there is a purpose that we bring to God
by virtue of the experiences that are possible
in this four-dimensional, space-time world.
So you're looking at a physical manifestation
of something much more infinite and more vast.
That essentially precedes all things, permeates all things.
When you take that down to this individuated level which is
a human being, we seem to be reflecting that same dynamic.
We have this part of ourselves as we all know
the term that we're spiritual beings living a human life.
We seem to have this schism withing ourselves
where the part that's living the human life
seems to have very little understanding of
and access to the infinite aspect of ourselves.
I'm sure you must have looked at this
and contemplated it to an extent.
I think there's a reason behind this.
We come into life without any knowledge
of who we really are or if I'm gonna put it this way,
what other lives we may have lived before.
We come into each life fresh and why is that?
Why are we forbidden to know who we really are
and where we really came from and I think the reason
is because that's the only way to play the game.
If you knew full well who you were
or what you've done in the past,
you wouldn't be able to live a free life.
You wouldn't be able to use your freewill
to either choose to evolve or to un-evolve yourself
as a spiritual being and the implication,
God is the ultimate source of everything.
If you knew it all, you couldn't honestly
create a new and novel existence
and I think that's the point of it,
to have a new and novel existence
be possible to see what you do with it.
Then to have that actually work out,
you have to not know what you're doing.
Otherwise the game is spoiled.
But it'd also be if in lives prior to this
for example, if there's been extreme trauma
or we've done things we may not feel too good about,
it might also put a repressive effect and judgement
on ourselves before we even start the game.
It would indeed in fact if you've lived, say you've been
some evil person in a past life and you have a chance
now to show that you've learned something
from that experience and you can do better,
well you'd have to come into this life without knowing that
otherwise that burden, that knowledge would keep you from
actually being able to change yourself in a positive way.
Now I'm not saying that if bad things happen
to good people, that implies that they've got some
karma to make up, I mean sometimes you can
choose I suppose, a life that is difficult,
that has hardships for its own merits
because that's a way to evolve yourself.
So we have to be careful with the application of the laws
of karma but I think the laws of karma are at play here.
Absolutely does there come a time
in a species history where we can evolve our own
consciousness and understanding of self
and acceptance of self to the extent where this
unification between our finer spirit, soul aspect
and the physical dimension of ourselves that
we're living in, the physical encasement and identity,
can actually successfully begin merging
is it possible we're approaching that status now?
I wish it were, I mean I think it may be possible,
I don't think it's gonna be anytime soon
given the state of the human of behavior
on the planet today, I'm kind of skeptical
it's gonna happen anytime soon.
But it would be great if we could enter into physical life,
knowing who we are and knowing we've been blessed
by being allowed to experience this arena here
and to fall in love and do all the things
that are pleasant to do without worrying about death
because we know that death is simply returning
to our realm as consciousness beings.
That'd be nice if it were like that but I'm a little bit
skeptical it's gonna happen any time soon.
And there are people on the planet who
are doing this, some of those that were called masters,
the Dalai Lama, the whole lineage of Lamas for example,
and even some of the younger children,
the little ones being born right now, there seems
to be evidence that they're coming in more integrated.
I'm little surprised that the Dalai Lama's not talked
more about this because I do see him as being
someone who's probably about as enlightened
as you can get on the planet these days or the today.
Yet I don't see him talking about the,
much about the role of karma or about
the whole process of being born and the purpose behind it.
I don't know why, maybe it's something that
he thinks shouldn't be brought to consciousness yet.
But I'm a little disappointed that I have not heard
more along these lines from him, even though I think
he's probably the most enlightened person on the planet.
Interesting, you know this is just speculation,
and that's all on my part, my guess is this,
because he has made it his path to
pass through some of the wisdoms of his lineage
to the western population and we're so programmed
against the notion of continued incarnations,
just to start with, doesn't even have a platform
to work with with the rest, how can you
I mean even his own lineage, I can understand
why he would just give us the western world,
little baby steps, little, little nibbles of information
without going into all of that, although I think
it's been already well documented
in terms of their, his lineage and the others before him,
if one cares to dig, but you're right, it's not just
being laid before us and what a beautiful gift
that would be from the Dalai Lama to say,
look this is how I understand the function of the soul.
Yep, it would be a very-very different world
if we actually had evidence and we truly believed
as a species that we're responsible for our actions,
that karma exists, it would certainly be a very
effective way to suppress some of the evil
because if you know it's gonna come back to you,
well unless you're really-really deranged and perverted,
you're probably not going to do something really evil
because you're gonna have experience yourself later.
If you truly believe that's how it works then
that would be a big deterrent.
We're on the same page (laugh) my friend,
I couldn't agree with you more on that.
When we're looking now, let's start taking
this overlay into,
more of the tenets that you have in your book.
We understand where we're coming from on
kind of an intimate level of understanding of soul
and the human but now going back to the world of science
where we were originally talking about to bring in Darwin,
to bring in Einstein, to bring in God and put all this
together and say each one is playing a very necessary part
in the evolution, well I don't mean theory of evolution,
but the evolution of consciousness on this planet.
How do you weave these all together?
How do you make that claim?
Well I think that first of all we have to accept some
of the fundamental discoveries of science as being valid.
I'm not gonna argue with the Big Bang, as I said before
I think even from a meta-physical perspective,
it's a great way to start a universe.
If I were God I think I would start the universe with
a big bang myself, it's a great way to start a universe.
In terms of evolution I think that's an essential part
of the if I can put it this way, God's plan.
Because without evolution you would have everything
either being totally chaotic
or you would have something that relies on the creator
to sort of tinker around with the world
and make things this way and that way and so on.
That's not really I think what God seeks.
I think what God seeks is a novel, new experience
to kind of put his, put his some of his powers
and abilities to work within an arena
and the arena in this case being our universe
and then letting it go and seeing what happens,
seeing what his own potential, what his own laws
and what his own abilities can result in.
If left to do it themselves but if he had to do it himself
and by micro-engineering things, that would probably
defeat the whole purpose of it.
It's the difference between living a life
and being an actor on a stage where you're all you're
doing is reading the dialogue over and over and over again.
Mm-hmm and where does the whole
notion of quantum mechanics fit into this creation?
Well quantum mechanics is I think what we're going
to learn at the basis of reality is consciousness.
Because conscious has been at the basis
of quantum mechanics since the get go.
And it's kind of the skeleton in the closet of physics
that it's really consciousness that makes quantum
mechanical measurements possible and
there're all sorts of ways that you can kind of
try to argue around this bit but still
you come back in the end to conscious as being
essential aspect, an essential aspect of quantum mechanics.
I think from quantum mechanics we're going to learn
that ultimately we're gonna have to build a world view
on consciousness rather than upon just matter and energy.
That matter and energy, even though they're valid
constituents of the universe, they're not the primary stuff.
They're the stuff that's ultimately made of consciousness.
Now how do you formulate this in a scientific way,
I don't know because science has so been
so much developed in terms of reductionist thinking
and materialist thinking, you have to start almost
from scratch to develop a science that is based on
consciousness but I think we're gonna be forced to do
that because I think that's the nature how it is.
And some of this is being done in some of
the experimentation as I mentioned before,
with Dean Radin for example, where he's certainly,
they've begun to understand that
a scientific outcome of an experiment is being altered
by the observer.
Right.
That's just pure consciousness interfacing
with consciousness right there.
I mean that's pretty, that's big I mean it seems like
they talk about Schrodinger's cat and
other experiments they've done ad nauseam
repeated, repeated, repeated.
But the implications of this are huge.
They are but I don't think they're quite
taken to that level by scientists.
At this point you can say consciousness
and then leave open what you mean by consciousness.
That's true.
Well we don't really know what it is yet
and it's probably still gonna be explainable
in terms of the neurons and brain chemistry and so on.
It kinda has an effect in quantum mechanics but
to make the leap from that to consciousness
is the fundamental stuff of reality,
that, that's a big leap for scientists to make.
It is a big leap but this is,
I think this is a really nice little connecting point.
If they're saying, simply by observing
an experiment, that that observation, even if you don't have
a defined point of view as what you want the outcome
to be just the observation itself will affect
where a wave or particle goes or what it becomes.
It does yeah.
That's a really, I think that's
a really significant beginning point to
be able to open that dialogue.
It does, it does raise a dialogue to the extent
that consciousness is now part of the game
but that still leaves open the question,
what is consciousness and you still then have
the desire on the part of mainstream science
to say well we will understand it eventually.
Somehow it rises up in the brain,
and as we do more brain studies we'll know
where it comes from and don't worry too much
about the meta-physical aspects of this
cus we'll eventually bring it into the house of science.
I think that's not gonna happen.
I think that the house of science is gonna have to expand
to include consciousness at the top-most level,
as a source of everything.
Absolutely, do you, have you, would you attempt
to define consciousness yourself at this point?
You know I think consciousness is a kind of thing
that you can't define, what you can do is say,
well I know of what conscious is because I am conscious.
I am conscious, it's the most primary, most fundamental
thing that I know, I guess I'd rather give up
believing that one plus one equals two,
than my own consciousness cus I know I'm conscious.
Everybody knows that but you can kind of
argue yourself into a corner, well it's really something
that's you know an epiphenomenon in the brain
and it's something that we'll understand eventually,
but I think that just the fact of our own experience
of consciousness is the best proof there is.
We gotta know we're conscious even those
who deny it know they're conscious.
I interviewed Raymond Moody,
Doctor Raymond Moody about the subject
of near-death experiences and he is a very
rational person, very much steeped in
the platonic world of science and yet at the same time
he cannot deny there is something that's
transcending any kind of chemical processes in the brain.
Any kind of physicality, I think you mentioned near-death
experience in some of your work too.
That's right there's I think very strong evidence for
near-death experiences and from transcendent experiences.
People throughout the ages, throughout the ages,
the mystics throughout the ages have reported
that there's a reality that they tune into that is
a reality that's more real than ordinary reality.
You can say well that's purely anecdotal
but I think there's more to it than that.
I think that, that constitutes evidence and it's
consciousness that it is the basis of things.
You know that the same time the consciousness
that we're speaking of just as we spoke about
a little bit ago with some of Dean Radin's experiments,
very much is interfacing with mind.
Smaller-mind, consciousness-mind and greater-mind.
The mind in consciousness, where those two meet,
where those fields meet, for lack of a better word,
I'm not a scientist so I'm not, I don't have
the vernacular to put it in but,
where mind and consciousness meet,
really is where all creation occurs.
Because it's directed.
I guess I don't know at this point
how I would differentiate mind from consciousness.
They're both mysterious aspects I mean
brain I know, it's the stuff up there in my head
but mind and consciousness, maybe one in the same thing.
Yes and that's how in my own internal-scape
I see the larger mind as the same as consciousness
but then there is also the conscious-animal portion
of the mind that has familiar experiences of the conscious
world we're bumping around in day to day and also
desires that may be driven by spirit or the soul.
That are projected through a mental desire,
or even a mental will on our part to spin
the creative process into motion.
So it seems like there's this interface that really
is the basis for the world we see around us,
this conscious creation of ours, as limited as it may be.
Is that an area that we really need to start looking at?
To start creating much more infinite types
of realities, types of experiences for ourselves.
Well I think we need to look at the conscious experiments
that go beyond the neurophysiology limitations.
Things that for example the people working in
para-psychology have done over the years and
that's still a field that's in limbo as far as mainstream
science is concerned but there's a huge amount of evidence
that para-psychological phenomena exist.
I think they are probably the direct,
will turn out to be the direct evidence of consciousness
playing a role in reality, I think that they will provide
the seminal data once it's been, once they are recognized
as being valid studies and in fact a valid discipline
and it's still sort of on the borderline still
but I think that it's future will grow dramatically.
Is that Doctor Charles Tart,
some of his work and others like him.
Well he among many others and Russel Targ,
Hal Puthoff...
and Russel Targ.
Yes I mean obviously they've produced,
they've certainly produced in the trenches results.
I just suppose science is still trying to explain
why this occurs the way it does.
There's also the Princeton experiments with
Robert Jahn, Brenda Dunne and York Dobyns and those people.
Go 'head and explain those.
Oh well they studied for years and years
the ability of the mind to affect random numbers
and they found the effect was really-really tiny
but really-really robust and by that
I mean that the effect of the mind on
like the outcome of say dice rolls,
the rolling of dice or just electronic dice or real dice,
is a tiny effect but it's becoming significant
at the level of one in a billion or more.
In terms of its probability of being just an accident.
So while the effect is small it's something
that's been repeatable many times and that
constitutes pretty good evidence in my opinion
that there is an effect of consciousness on matter.
Absolutely and then where non-matter
is concerned, some have even, the early experiments,
I was talking to you off camera about this as well.
I originally met Russel Targ about 26 years ago,
interviewing him when he had just gotten back
from Russia where they were doing the joint US,
Soviet experiments on remote viewing
and the kicker to that story was that
the target, the woman Juna was viewing into the future.
She didn't know that at the time and
this starts bringing up the whole notion of mind.
What is time, what is space, how does mind
interface with the consciousness that moves
beyond time and space, is it all one and the same?
Seeing it from a really simple point of view
as just a human being who is using their own mind
and consciousness, it looks really easy.
If we are a part of that consciousness that is God,
we have that infinite part of us that moves beyond time and
space and that are immensely capable as creators ourself,
I don't see any real conflict with any of it
but again how do you prove it.
Right, well I guess you prove it by
experiments in the laboratory but even that is not
good enough for mainstream science yet.
Certainly the, if we are manifestations of
a universal consciousness that would explain
our ability to from time to time, do things that simply
are not possible within the ordinary space-time paradigm.
These things do happen and I think that
where the evidence is going to come from that
gives us a brighter perspective of the nature
of the human being what we are, are we simply physical
entities made of chemistry and matter or are we
spiritual beings that use these bodies to gain experience?
And there's some really cool experiments
that actually are going on that everyday people can
participate in and one of the people I interviewed recently
said, "we really need to have more science on this,"
not less science but get science involved
in a new way on it so that it can be
reflected throughout the community
not just in a few highly-funded laboratories.
That made perfect sense to me and even in the room,
we're sitting in the room and they had
everyone in the room who was attending
this conference do a little experiment.
Look at the screen on there and an image
is going to appear on the screen in a box,
on either the right side or left side, before the image
appears right down left or right and so as soon as
the image appeared, okay get ready, write down
left or right and it was amazing how accurate,
I mean more than half of the audience was able
to accurately guess which side of the screen
the image was going to appear on.
This seems to me to be perfectly valid science,
but he said this hasn't been documented,
this hasn't been funded, no one is going to know
about what's been done here today.
Yet it is perfectly valid science.
How would you get the massive,
the world of science to begin creating
these kinds of experiments that mean something to people?
Well that's a good question, I tried this myself.
For many years I was editor of a journal,
called the Journal of Scientific Exploration
and we were the only journal that had
a scholarly kind of format, peer reviewing
of the articles that are submitted,
and see them open to subjects that
are not possible in mainstream science
and of course the ESP area was one
that we got lots of papers in and so we sorted
through those and decided which ones
had the right kind of scientific credentials
or that kind of scientific methodology appllied
to the experiments that were reported
and so we published them in the hope that by getting things
out there that have the scientific method as their basis,
and even the odd results that we got from the perspective
of mainstream science, would be looked at seriously.
But pretty much science has managed to ignore these things.
We have the journal, the data are out there.
They're increasingly becoming available.
At this point it hasn't made the breakthrough yet.
It's still something that's sort of sitting outside
the doorstep waiting to be let in (laugh).
Is it really more up to us as the consumer
so to speak, as the observers to demand this
or to participate or to look beyond science now?
Because they're not answering a lot of the questions
people want answered anymore, we're not finding it there.
In this realm in particular.
Well there is a tension between what the public wants.
What the public thinks should be looked at by science
and what scientists think is valid.
Of course people are tax payers,
so they have the right to expect that science would
respond to problems that the public wants investigated.
But at this point there doesn't seem to be any good method
for putting pressure on science to go beyond its boundaries.
And science is having a pretty successful run.
It has had for the last 100 years.
It's still basking in its success and going,
well why should we spend our time,
our valuable time and resources,
looking at things that are not liable to be fruitful.
So I don't yet how this, well I guess I do think,
it'll eventually come to the point where science
will have to recognize the validity of things that
are outside of its realm now but I'm kinda skeptical
about the timescale being any time soon.
I can understand your concern about
those timelines because we don't seem
to be seeing a lot of evidence but I think this is also
being reinforced by pop-culture whether it's because of fear
of credibility, giggle factors, or out and out conspiracy,
I don't know, I don't care to venture
but the media itself,
is completely skewed toward
the body of science and not what we're speaking about.
In fact there's a ridicule factor around it.
Yes that's right.
So (clears throat) excuse me.
So it appears to me that science may be reflecting,
in that sense it may be reflecting, what they think
is the cultural desire and that's being driven
by other forces beyond our understanding whether
it's Wall Street or whether it's Madison Avenue.
This notion that we cannot open up to consciousness
without getting it muddled with religion
is it keeps everyone running for cover around the subject.
Well I think that's true but I don't think,
I'm just guessing. I don't think that's the primary
motivation for the, sort of the desire to keep,
to keep these things at arms length.
I think what happens is that scientists
are very busy and they have their areas of expertise
and their successful at them and the world manifests
all the discoveries of science beautifully.
Again as I said earlier, the car you drive, the computer
you operate, these are all products of science.
Who can deny them?
That we're grateful for.
We're grateful for them and they demonstrate
that science is correct as far as it goes.
The point is, where is that as far as it goes?
If you work within the body of scientific knowledge,
indeed it self-reinforces and there's
ample evidence that it works.
But the question is what lies beyond?
What kind of pressure is going to be put on science
to look more seriously without laughing or giggling,
at the what's beyond and that's something
I think that still needs to be worked out.
It still needs to be sorted out.
Yeah because the materialistic lens
is it seems to me to be coming to
a breaking point In viewing that as
the beginning and end of reality as we know it.
Well there hasn't been any real strong
thing that we can't explain, that needs explanation,
that requires us to move beyond the scientific paradigm.
So we haven't found the perplexing problem
that really needs a solution that will take us
beyond the ordinary, conventional way of looking at things.
I haven't seen that on the horizon yet.
And yet as seen in your book, John von Neumann,
1932 he theorized that the field of quantum mechanics,
he was a mathematician right, requires consciousness
to even get a measurable result.
1932?
That's right.
That was a long time ago, this was known already.
It was known, in fact it's built into quantum mechanics.
That the consciousness needs to be part of
the measurement process but again that leaves open
the question, what is consciousness?
You can say well we need consciousness to make
a quantum measurement but we don't really know what it is
and maybe we'll discover that it really does come from
the brain somehow and we'll put this question aside because
we don't know what to do with it right now.
So it doesn't necessarily take us to that level where
we say that it's consciousness that really is the primary
stuff of reality and that's what we're gonna look at.
There's still this gap here where there's not enough
pressure that pops open or pops through that gap
to this other kind of way of looking at things.
So that's gonna come from us,
we need to create the pressure.
We need to have, we need to demand to understand
reality on a deeper level as a populace.
They're not going to respond if we don't demand it right?
Well I guess that's right but there's also a danger
in that in that when people start to say well
there are all these things that science is not looking at.
Boy do you open the door to all sorts of crazy things.
(hearty laughs)
That's really a put off for scientists.
Especially now that it's come year 2012
and hear so much nonsense and talk about 2012
that it's really quick to probably set back
the relationship between science and the public
by I don't know say a couple years (laugh).
Well I think it'll create greater polarization
no doubt about it and then where's religion
come in to all of this, organized religion?
Well organized religion, as I said in my book,
I think there's a big difference to be drawn,
big distinction to be drawn between
organized religion and spirituality.
Organized religion has major problems and always has had.
Look at all the violence and the hatred
and the intolerance that comes out of organized religions,
or the wealth that's accumulated by so many
organizations within organized religions.
The fact that religions contradict each other,
so I think that ultimately in the future
religions may be a thing of the past
and that would not be a bad thing,
but I think spirituality as our, as what we,
the study of what we are as human beings,
spiritual beings, that's not going to go away
because I think that's built in to reality,
but religions themselves they are a mixed blessing.
It's more really, the what you were
just describing in terms of the
effects which have to do with the building of wealth
and violence and intolerance and separation,
is really more like the business
of the corporate world in politics.
It is it's a lot of corporate world in politics
on the spiritual side and not the spiritual side,
the religious side of things and that's unfortunate
because religions really ought to be,
they ought to be uplifting and enlightening organizations.
Bring out the best in us and in fact often times
they bring out the worst in people.
You find all sorts of crazy things
done in the name of religion.
Religion's supposed to be something that promotes peace.
Yet look at all the wars and battles that've been fought
by religions even today in the middle east,
you've got in the two sects of Islam, fighting each other.
Same religion and yet they hate each other because
they have slightly different interpretations of the lineage
of Muhammad or whatever the basis of the arguments are.
And is it not also possible that science has a,
feels a responsibility
of sorts because of the
fallout from religious fanaticism for example
to maybe hold its cards a little closer to its chest,
not to have their findings confused with the world
of religion as we know it today.
Well that's indeed true that some of the behavior
of religious, or some organizations, some individuals
is exactly the kind of thing that science is going
to react to and go "oh my God," and we better stay
away from this because after all look at what the kind of
craziness results from taking these ideas seriously,
let's just, let's be really, let's circle the wagons
against this kind of nonsense and there is
a circle the wagons mentality, people that,
like Richard Dawkins for example in his book,
certainly would be one of the leaders of
the circle the wagons movement.
Yeah, definitely.
I can understand that because the craziness
that goes on in the world is certainly,
it's terrible and it should not be something
that comes out of religions and often times does.
There are good reasons to circle the wagons,
but circling the wagons doesn't mean that there's
this vast territory out there beyond your circling in that
you're gonna have to approach eventually.
And probably the hottest buzz word
in that that would interface with the two
would be the word, the term intelligent design.
I guess so, I myself stay away from that,
I have to be very careful in my book not to talk about
intelligent design, first of all I don't believe
that it happens, I think that evolution is an essential part
of the whole plan behind the universe.
I think that the two key discoveries of science
that are at the basis I think of my world view
as a scientist who takes spirituality seriously,
is the Big Bang and evolution, both these things
are really necessary to have the kind of universe
that I think that, if I may put it this way,
that God wants to have for his experience.
And yet at the same there is an intelligence
that may have perpetuated that to being with.
Indeed I think what though happened is that the
intelligence created the laws of nature, the laws of nature
are probably the thoughts of God and then you let
the universe work itself out, you let evolution happen
on the surface of the planets and it can exist in
the universe that has these laws and so it's the designing
of the laws that I think is where the creator enters in.
Then once the laws are set then the things let go
to see what develops, what happens naturally.
The laws of nature being the thoughts of God,
that's something that's compatible with science.
Now science wouldn't prove that of course,
but there's nothing that contradicts science
in that perspective cus we don't know where
the laws came from, no scientist does,
so you may have attributed them to a creator
well that's as valid as anything else.
Very well stated,
we don't have a lot of time left cus I know you have another
appointment in a bit but I just wanted to get into something
with you that I thought was such an interesting perspective,
that I spotted you originally about a year ago
at a remote viewing workshop that was being
conducted by Tom Campbell who we interviewed
that very day, also there was Russel Targ your
lifelong friend or at least of the last 30 years
and toward the end of it we actually had to do
a little remote viewing experiments but
along the way he was talking about the power
of the mind and the nature of collective,
individuated and also localized, collective reality
and he was talking about the reality we experience
in our material world being something that was
rendered on a collective basis.
Talk about how you understood that a little bit
if you would before we sign off here, I love that.
Yeah Tom Campbell's an amazing guy, he's a physicist,
a NASA consultant, a PHD physicist and one who studied
for years and years with Robert Monroe
and he researched some of the topics that were at
the beginning of the Monroe Institute.
He was one of the people that actually
tried to analyze what was going on there.
He became very proficient at creating his own
out-of-body experiences and in these out-of-body experiences
he traveled to many different realms.
Most people would probably not take that seriously,
they'd say well he's imagined this or he dreamed this
or he just made this up maybe.
By having gotten to know him, I think that what
he's reporting is valid information.
He's suggesting that the physical reality
we experience is one of many realities
and that they're all digitally based, it's really
a matter of computing, it's really Sim City.
It's really creating virtual realities
and that we're in this reality right now,
are experiencing a virtual reality,
that our consciousness as spiritual beings,
has collectively fabricated a world made up of these
laws of nature that are not things out there in space-time,
they're algorithms and just like the virtual reality
to your computer can look very realistic,
we're doing that very same thing here.
He's perhaps the first one to,
bring together the view of spirituality with
computer-science and simulation and doing so
not just on the basis of his hypothesizing,
but on the basis of his actually having
experienced some of these realities.
I was fascinated by what he had to say,
now he may be all wrong but I don't think so.
I think he's really onto something.
Oh no I think he is too I mean
he certainly seems to have bumped into some
fundamental alternate truths here.
That's right yeah.
And what this would indicate to me
is this world that we see and that we're experiencing
and playing out in, is a reflection
of our level of consciousness at this time.
It would be yes.
So I ask you, do you ever imagine
the next phase, the next step for humanity?
What might the continuation of our creation look like?
And I know there're alternate scenarios there too.
What do you see, what would you like to see?
Two different questions I know.
I guess what I'd like to see is a reality in which we are
more consciously aware of what we really are.
I think that most of the problems in the world
result from our not knowing our true nature
and being driven by ego and the ego of course
is possible because we don't know who we truly are.
If we are truly believe we were in some sense
all conscious beings that we're connected at some level,
manifestations of the same consciousness,
we wouldn't have this sense of fierce individuality
that can be fine up to a point but that can take us
to the exploitation of others because we think
that whatever we can get, we should get
because after all, we have one life to live
and you might as well maximize the pleasure
and the gain of it and profit of it.
And I think that's exactly wrong,
the wrong perspective on life.
So if we had the knowledge of what we truly were,
and really believed that, I think human behavior
would be radically different, we'd have a much better world.
And that's about as far as I can go along the lines of
speculating what things might be like, maybe a century
from now, maybe two centuries from now,
maybe only decades I don't know,
I'm certainly hoping for the latter.
Do you see things devolving
a little bit more before they evolve?
Maybe so, the events of the last 10 years
have been pretty discouraging, when I was a kid,
when I was in high school I guess,
2001 A Space Odyssey came out
and I thought "wow" and "this is terrific."
Look at what's gonna happen to us in in the future.
I might even live long enough to experience some of this.
Now look what really happened in 2001.
I mean it's such an opposite kind of situation
from what the expectations and hopes might have been.
It's been kind of a downer the last ten years,
to see all the emergence of bombings and hatreds
and intolerance and dictatorships and all
of the ugly things that we've got
to outgrow if we're going to survive.
And what about the abandonment
of the shuttle missions?
The shuttle is a funny thing, the shuttle never
should've been built the way it was, it was,
in order to try to save costs there were designs
that were made that were simply stupid.
For example instead of having the shell of the shutte
made out of a proper kind of material, now I've forgotten
what that was, they put tiles on it,
tiles that can crack and fall off and so
the shuttle was designed to be something that
could get man into space and that's low-Earth orbit
by the way, not even anywhere near the Moon,
into space very cheaply and easily,
so it'd be a cheap way for astronauts to go up,
fix things, put things in orbit, bring things back down.
It turned out to be enormously expensive.
Probably 10 times more expensive per flight
than was originally estimated,
it's like over a billion dollars per shuttle launch,
So it was a huge boondoggle and it kept us
in low-Earth orbit by that I mean the shuttle flies around,
I don't know, 200, 300 miles above the Earth.
That's it that's as far as it can go, it's not barely
in space at all, nowhere near going to the moon,
We can't go to the Moon now.
We went to the moon 40 years ago we can't now.
I think the shuttle was a huge boondoggle.
We unfortunately don't have anything in its place yet.
We are talking vaguely about doing other things
like going and exploring an asteroid or a comet.
Well maybe but I'd be surprised if congress
passes the money for that, I think that
the best hope we have for a vibrant space program in the US,
is if the Chinese and the Russians, probably
not the Russians so much, they're pretty broke,
but the Chinese and the Indians, if they start getting
into space, then that'll be an impetus
for us to go back in too, but the shuttle was a very
mixed thing, it really kind of us bound to Earth
even though it ostensibly goes up into quote space.
And yet 40 years ago we were on the Moon?
Yeah 40 years ago we were on the Moon, yeah.
Well that sounds like devolution to me.
It does yeah, when I was a teenager and man first went
to the Moon, I thought well gee that's great,
we'll have a lunar base another 10 or 20 years,
then onto Mars and I'll live to see it.
Well it's not working out that way.
Any final thoughts?
I guess I would like to see, the things
I just talked about of course but I would like to see
science become more open to some
of the evidence that there is more to reality
than simply the physical universe and that does not
mean that anything within science has to be given up,
we've conquered all this territory in sciecne
and made technology work for us and that's great,
we don't need to give up any of that,
we just need to realize that the boundaries of that
perspective are not hard boundaries, they're only as far
as we've gone intellectually so far, beyond that
there lie new things, that which we're seeing glimpses
from people who are not scientists
but that are of areas where probably, not probably
but certainly, there's a lot to be discovered.
A lot that will take us into new territory entirely.
If we just have the courage to say well,
we're not giving up science, but we're not gonna
draw a hard line around it, a hard boundary around it,
to try to protect it because there doesn't need to be,
it does not need to be protected.
We need to explore what's beyond there.
On that note, thank you very much
for spending the time with us I very much enjoyed it.
Thank you.
I hope you enjoyed this conversation.
I found Bernard to be refreshingly honest
in his appraisal of the future of science.
He's the kind of scientist that gives me hope.
For more on his books and work
you can go to The God Theory dot com.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(jazzy music)